---
category: psychology
tags: persuasion
source: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/60f5def47aa1cc55816b6a28/t/629130dcc6459957d7fbd036/1653682396708/How+Minds+Change+Discussion+Guide_preorder.pdf
author: David McRaney
title: HOW MINDS CHANGE... AND HOW TO CHANGE THEM IN 10 STEPS
---

## A guide to persuasion and better disagreements

### DISCUSSION GUIDE

Thank you so much for preordering How Minds Change. I truly appreciate it, and
I’d like to offer you this birds-eye view companion guide for the book. First,
an overview of some of the key concepts and how they fit together. Then, a
step-by-step walkthrough of how to get the most out of a disagreement. Don’t
worry, it’s short and simple.

Why a guide? I mean, you have the whole book already, right? Well, my hope is
that this will be helpful to readers who finish the book, or skip straight to
the parts about persuasion, and feel compelled to apply some of the insights
and techniques in their own conversations. You might consider using this as a
discussion guide as well, if you plan on reading the book in a group. If you
do, I recommend respectfully and empathetically trying out the conversational
tactics outlined in the persuasion quick sheet below.

First, a few concepts from the book:

### Arguing

Early on in the book, we explore how human brains evolved to reach
consensus—sometimes on the facts, sometimes on right and wrong, sometimes on
what to eat for dinner—by banging our heads together. That led to the innate
psychology that compels us to persuade others to see things our way, especially
when we feel as though others are mistaken, misled, or misguided. Thanks to
that innate psychology, we are all capa- ble of changing our minds and changing
the minds of others.

To leverage that capability, it’s crucial to avoid debate and start having
conversations. Debates have winners and losers, and no one wants to be a loser.
But if both sides feel safe to explore their reasoning, to think about their
own thinking, to explore their motivations, we can each avoid the dead-end goal
of winning an argument. Instead, we can pursue the shared goal of learning the
truth.

### COGNITIVE EMPATHY

Each of our brains creates its own private understanding through unique
experiences and observations. In more scientific terms, minds slowly accumulate
cognitive material to construct broadly similar, but individ- ually unique,
models of reality. We use those models to make sense of what’s happening
outside our skulls from moment to moment.

In chapter three, we learn the science behind all this and why different life
experiences can lead to very different disambiguations, and thus very different
subjective realities. When that happens in the presence of substantial
uncertainty, we may vehemently disagree over reality itself—but since no one on
either side is aware of the brain processes leading up to that disagreement, it
makes the people who see things differently seem, in a word, wrong.

This usually leads to our greatest disagreements and most intractable disputes.
Contentious issues are contentious because we are disambiguating them
differently, unconsciously, and not by choice. If we can see that...it can lead
to “cognitive empathy,” an understanding that what others experience as the
truth arrives in their minds unconsciously. This is why arguing over
conclusions so often feels like a waste of time. In How Minds Change we learn
about better ways for both parties to focus on their processing, on how and why
they see what they see, not what.

### ASSIMILATION AND ACCOMMODATION

A few chapters in, I explore the science of how, when brains feel uncertain and
when new information and experiences seem ambiguous, we use our current
understanding cobbled together from previous experienc- es to make sense of
things. Brains do this via two mechanisms. 

One is assimilation, which is the process of disambiguating the ambiguous by
attempting to fit novel infor- mation into an existing model. That way, new
experiences and information can be interpreted as confirma- tion that our
beliefs, attitudes, and values were right all along. Accommodation, however, is
acknowledging that our current understanding is either incomplete or incorrect,
and then updating our models to make room for a new layer of understanding.
Great conversations encourage accommodation as everyone trades unique ideas and
perspectives.

### THE AFFECTIVE TIPPING POINT

In many ways, persuasion is convincing a brain (yours included) to commit to a
calorically expensive, time-consuming, globally disruptive accommodation effort
(while it struggles to avoid all that through assim- ilation instead). When
confronted with novel information, we often experience cognitive dissonance,
espe- cially when it calls into question our beliefs, attitudes, allegiances,
or identities.

The brain can quickly resolve that dissonance by updating its interpretation of
the information so that it seems supportive instead of challenging. That is to
say, it can get out of the conflict and avoid all that ef- fort, by finding a
way to see what it expected to see. But there is a breaking point—something
psychologists call the affective tipping point. It’s that “I might be wrong
feeling,” and we evolved to feel a sharp twinge of doubt that encourages us to
stop, pay attention, and carefully consider changing our minds. We are careful,
and often resist, because changing our minds when we shouldn't is dangerous (we
might become wrong); but not changing our minds when we should is also
dangerous (we might stay wrong).

So our brains walk a tightrope, changing our minds carefully based on a variety
of motivations and goals. A great conversation requires everyone involved to
extend a hand and help others walk that tightrope.

### REASONING AIN’T LOGIC

Reasoning is often confused with “reason,” the philosophical concept of using
intellect, logic, and rationality to make decisions and form judgments. To be
sure, logic is an amazing tool, a formal language for trading and evaluating
propositions, and humans possess an array of cognitive talents we can
categorize as reason itself, but “reasoning” is something else.

In the book we explore how research suggests reasoning, in the psychological
sense, is coming up with jus- tifications—plausible explanations for what we
think, feel, and believe, and plausible means, which we intuit our trusted
peers will accept as reasonable. Because this is how and why we come up with
our reasons for our positions, the true motivations for why we disagree often
remain hidden to us, especially in the heat of an argument, which can make
resolving disagreements difficult for both sides.

To reach accommodation, to change a mind, a persuasion attempt must patiently
walk the other party back- wards through their own processing chain, to
discover their true motivations and goals. If you remain at the end of the
chain instead, you’ll end up debating all the supporting facts, claims, and
feelings, and may never encourage change.

How do you do it? It takes time and effort and a lot of conversation, but the
steps are similar across many different persuasive techniques which emphasize
guided metacognition over brawling debate. When it works, it can seem like
magic, because the other person will change their own mind as a better route
out of dissonance becomes clear.

## THE PERSUASION QUICK SHEET

> HOW TO CHANGE SOMEONE’S MIND IN 10 STEPS

Ok, here’s the part where we will walk through some simple, actionable steps
for changing minds. Each method covered in the book falls under something
psychologists call “technique rebuttal.” There are many forms of technique
rebuttal, which just means you focus on a person’s reasoning in a conversation.

The Socratic method is a form of technique rebuttal, but there are many others,
like deep canvassing, cognitive behavioral therapy, and motivational
interviewing. Each emphasizes listening in a non-judgemental and empathetic
manner in an effort to help people explore their own thinking, to discover
their true reasons for feeling certain. The many methods covered in the book
vary depending on the issue at hand.

For instance, if you wish to encourage or discourage a behavior, or change a
person’s attitude from positive to negative or vice versa, the method below
would differ a bit. But since many times our arguments concern the truth of the
matter, in this quick guide we will use a variation of street epistemology, a
technique covered in Chapter 9, to help a person question a belief.

Here are the steps:

### STEP ZERO: WHY DO I WANT TO DO THIS?

The first step, step ZERO, is to ask yourself why you are so sure. Ask yourself
who you trust and why. Admit to yourself that you are likely not an expert on
the topic, and that you are basing your attitudes and beliefs on personal
experiences, incomplete information, and on experts you trust. Explore, for
yourself, why you harbor that trust. Most importantly, ask yourself why you
want to change the other person’s mind.

### STEP ONE: BUILD RAPPORT

Next, in the conversation, make it your number one priority to build trust and
express both curiosity and compassion. It’s important to remember that the
other person must be open to all of this. You must ask for consent, and you
must remain transparent.

Then, as you open the dialogue, assure the other party you aren’t out to shame
them or put them in a position to be ostracized by their peers. Demonstrate
your openness and respect, and work to collaborate on a shared goal of
understanding why you disagree. The goal is to build rapport and to
avoid-us-versus them framing. If your relationship with the other person has
suffered from disagreements and arguments in the past, building rapport could
take a few conversations. This may take time, but until you establish trust,
it’s best not to move on to the other steps.

### STEP TWO: ASK THEM TO IDENTIFY THEIR BELIEF

If the issue is fact-based, ask for a claim. This could be anything from “the
moon landing is a hoax,” to “cars run on the sadness of ghosts.” Since the rest
of the steps will encourage the other person to investigate the personal
reasoning they feel supports their claim, both parties must agree on what they
will be discussing.

### STEP THREE: REPEAT THEIR CLAIM + CONFIRM UNDERSTANDING

Repeat the claim back to the other person in your own words. It’s important to
truly listen and understand, and just as important to communicate your
understanding. Assure the other person you are listening by asking if you have
it right, and when they say you d o, move to the next step.

### STEP FOUR: IDENTITY THEIR DEFINITIONS AND USE THEIR TERMINOLOGY

Clarify their definitions. Once you have, use their definitions, not yours.
From the book: “The problem with most arguments is that we often aren’t
actually arguing, because our definitions of the terms aren’t the same as
theirs. Take ‘the government,’ for example. You might see it as a collection of
civil servants trying to appease their constituents. They might see it as a
smoke-filled room where a ring of wicked billionaires share plans to divvy up
the country. If you assume that you are both talking about your concept of ‘the
government,’ then you end up arguing with yourself rather than focusing on the
other person’s ideas.”

### STEP FIVE: ON A SCALE OF 1 TO TEN, ASK HOW CONFIDENT THEY FEEL

Ask your conversation partner to put a number on their feeling of confidence.
It could be 1 to 10 or 0 to 100. Use whatever you prefer. The idea is to
encourage active processing so they can begin to think about their own
thinking. From here, ask why that number feels right to them, and hold space
for their explanations. You can prompt further exploration by asking “why not
higher?” Or “why not lower?”

### STEP SIX: ASK YOUR PARTNER TO ARTICULATE THEIR REASONING

Identify the reasons they feel support their confidence. If they offer several,
look for what seems common amongst them. The reasons that come to mind might
not be the true reasons they feel strongly about the issue. We often avoid
introspection and offer provisional justifications at first, sometimes
parroting common arguments or offering what seems like a reasonable explanation
without considering if there might be something else motivating our certainty
or lack thereof.

One way to help someone investigate their thinking is to ask about a particular
reason they’ve presented, “If you discovered that was not true, would it change
your mind?” If they say no, then you can put that reason aside and continue to
explore.

### STEP SEVEN: ASK QUESTIONS THAT ENCOURAGE REFLECTION

In this, the most important step, the goal is to help the other person test the
reliability of their methods for arriving at certainty on this issue, and maybe
others as well. There are many ways to go about asking questions in this step.

You could start by simply asking what method they use to determine their
reasons are good. Another variation is to ask if someone else were to look at
the same evidence but reach a differ- ent conclusion, how would a third person
looking at both of their arguments determine which was true? Whatever they
answer, you can keep exploring by asking if someone using their method could
arrive at a different or competing conclusion. The goal is to help the other
person judge the quality of their reasoning process when it comes to their
certainty on this particular belief.

### STEP EIGHT: CLARIFY, REPEAT, AND CONNECT TO THEIR VALUES.

Paraphrase as best you can what they’ve shared so far and ask if you’ve heard
them correctly. Repeat until it feels like you’ve reached a stopping point, and
then feel free to share your own beliefs on the matter. Ask if the other person
wants to explore them in the same way you explored theirs. If so, go through
the steps yourself. Otherwise, finish with the next step.

### STEP NINE: CLOSE WITH APPRECIATION FOR THEIR OPENNESS

Wrap up, wish them well, and part company by suggesting you have more
conversations like this in the future.
