---
category: psychology 
tags: lifehack
source: https://bakadesuyo.com/2022/05/be-yourself/
title: The Lazy Way To An Awesome Life - Barking Up The Wrong Tree
---

**TODO**: clean up and highlight

> The maxim says that with others you should just “be yourself.” But is that
> true? Here's what science says about being your best self...

![be-yourself](https://bakadesuyo.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/be-yourself.jpg
"be-yourself")  The old maxim says that with others you should just “be
yourself.”

But is that really _true_?

In researching my new book, [Plays Well With Others](https://geni.us/pwwo), I
went down the rabbit hole to see whether it’s accurate — and also what we can
do to be our best selves. (Never be ashamed of who you are… that’s your
parents’ job.)

In the excerpt below we’re going to learn a dead simple way to become more of
the person you want to be.

This is part of the section I had to cut from the book. I wish I could have
included it but my publisher had a strict word count limit. You’ll get the rest
of it – 25% more book — if you preorder now. **Only one week left to get the
[bonuses](https://bakadesuyo.com/2022/03/plays-well-with-others/).** Grab a
copy at [Amazon](https://geni.us/pwwo), [Barnes and
Noble](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/plays-well-with-others-eric-barker/1140211332),
[Books A
Million](https://www.booksamillion.com/p/Plays-Well-Others/Eric-Barker/9780063050945?id=8477017598654),
[Indiebound](https://www.indiebound.org/book/9780063050945) or
[Bookshop](https://bookshop.org/books/plays-well-with-others-the-surprising-science-behind-why-everything-you-know-about-relationships-is-mostly-wrong/9780063050945).

Okay, let’s get to it…

Bonus Excerpt: “Be Yourself”
----------------------------

If you want to best predict how you will behave, personality traits alone won’t
tell you. Introverts don’t _always_ act introverted. But how people react to
particular situations is very consistent. You might be very shy around
strangers but you may be very talkative around close friends.

If you want to learn more about yourself, use the formula “I am… when…” and
you’ll see much more reliable patterns. “I am always on time when it comes to
my job” and “I am always a half hour late when I have to meet friends” will be
more predictive than merely saying you’re “conscientious.”

It’s now widely accepted that when trying to predict behavior it’s usually more
effective to look at someone’s surroundings than to ask what kind of person
they are. Simply put, context matters. Man, does it ever. And the biggest
factor in context is usually other people. For proof, look no further than
teenagers. In case you are just visiting Earth, teens tend to do what other
teens around them are doing and the science totally backs this up.

A survey of 75,000 college students showed that, on average, if you want to
know how often a student drinks, just ask them how often they think their peers
are drinking. (Oh, and be careful about correcting their beliefs with data
because this will cause the ones who drink less than average to start drinking
more, as researchers trying to reduce student drinking sadly found out.) What
is the single best predictor of whether teens will like a song? Whether or not
it’s already popular – even if that perception of popularity was totally rigged
by the experimenters.

If you want to increase a student’s grades, just give them a roommate with a
higher GPA. And for similar reasons, “Scared Straight” doesn’t work. Programs
for at-risk teens fail miserably, averaging a 13% _increase_ in crimes
committed. Why? You just took a group of teens who break the law and put them
together where they can more effectively influence one another. (And the
biggest increase was seen among kids with no previous criminal record.)
Meanwhile, “Big Brothers” and “Big Sisters” programs that pair troubled youth
with good mentors are very effective. But “behavioral contagion” isn’t just
true for young people, adults are influenced just the same…

What increases support for women’s rights around the world? That’s right: cable
TV. Bring it to rural India and soon domestic violence and fertility both drop
while female autonomy surges. Bring it to Brazil and separations and divorces
spike – but only in regions where service was available. Why? Women see other
female characters living lives where they have more control and go: _Huh. I
don’t have to put up with this anymore. I can be like her._ And when the
progressive Turkish soap opera “Noor” started being aired in Arab nations, the
divorce rate in the UAE surged by 10%. (Oh, and there didn’t used to be any
Dylans in France but by the mid-1990’s it was the sixth most common name for
boys. “Beverly Hills 90210” had arrived.)

We’re all influenced by others, that’s obvious. But the degree to which others
affect our behavior can be hard to accept – especially in very serious areas
where we’d like to think we’re in charge.

Take your health, for example. The Framingham study showed that drinking,
smoking and obesity are all quite contagious. If someone you consider a friend
becomes obese, your likelihood of obesity increases by 53%. And if the
friendship is mutual, the number rises to 171%. (This has nothing to do with
genetics or like-hangs-out-with-like. When military families move to a new base
with a higher obesity rate, their chance of gaining weight goes up.) And these
behavioral contagion effects are seen _three degrees out_. To quote Christakis
and Fowler, who analyzed the data from The Framingham study, “You may not know
him personally, but your friend’s husband’s coworker can make you fat. And your
sister’s friend’s boyfriend can make you thin.”

And it’s not just health, it’s also relationships. Divorce is contagious out to
two degrees. (So your sister’s friend’s boyfriend can make you fat and your
sister’s friend can end your marriage.) Did your sibling have a baby? That
means you’re much more likely to have a kid in the next two years.

And let’s not forget about happiness. Christakis and Fowler found that happy
friends make you 15% more likely to be happy. And, like obesity, this effect
spans three degrees. Happy friends of friends increase your odds of smiling by
10% and friends of friends of friends still add 6% to your chances. (It’s worth
nothing that an extra $12,000 a year in 2021 dollars only increases your chance
of happiness by 2%.) With each friend boosting the likelihood of happiness by
9% and every unhappy friend reducing your odds by 7%, making friends is like
card counting for happiness.

As Eric Hoffer once said, “When people are free to do as they please, they
usually imitate each other.” Sometimes it’s quite deliberate but more often
it’s unconscious. We’re just wired for it. This is what it means when we say
humans are a social species. This tendency toward imitation underlies empathy,
morality, collaboration and group formation. We naturally mimic others and in
research where confederates are told to deliberately _not_ mimic study
subjects, those subjects reported liking the confederates less – but they
didn’t know why. New therapists frequently report feeling depressed after
treating depressed patients. It’s human nature.

Of course, some people are more influential than others. No doubt, famous
people have a disproportionate impact. That said, we’re far more influenced by
those around us than by celebrities. And a University of Pennsylvania study
found that once 25% of the members of a group adopt a new behavior, most
everyone else quickly follows suit.

Please don’t tell me you think you’re an exception. If you think you are,
answer this question for me: what does “rich” mean? What’s a “big” house?
What’s a “nice” car? _You cannot answer these questions without context._ A
“nice” car for you is probably not a nice car for Jeff Bezos. People like to
say, “I don’t care what anyone thinks” but they do and it affects their
behavior, even if they don’t realize it, because the vast majority of us follow
norms the vast majority of the time and norms don’t come from thin air. Did you
wear a dashiki today or a medieval suit of armor? No, you dressed pretty much
like your friends. Just like you do every day.

It’s in our nature to want to feel accepted and get along with people. And
communities are not formed by everyone being an utterly unique individual with
nothing in common. In your average conversation, the cost of being wrong on the
facts is often nothing but the costs of disagreeing with those around you can
be enormous. Yes, consciously compromising yourself doesn’t feel good but so
much of this happens beneath awareness, at the emotional level. A 2016 study in
_Neuroscience and Behavioral Reviews_ looked at neuroimaging data and found
disagreeing with others can actually trigger “error” signals in your brain and
cause aversive feelings.

As UVA professor Timothy Wilson reports, people often think they’re choosing
original names for their baby and yet, inevitably, there are huge trends in the
aggregate. As a psychologist, Wilson knows how susceptible other people are to
these unconscious influences… And then he and his wife did the exact same thing
when they named their son Christopher. They chose the name because they “liked
it” — and it turned out to be the single most popular name for boys that year.
None of us are immune.

Sounds like we’re all just caving to “peer pressure.” And everything we hear
growing up is that peer pressure is evil. But that’s largely a myth. The
majority of the time peer pressure is quite good, if not utterly essential.
Yes, it can lead us to bad behavior but it’s those same pressures that lead to
the majority of our good behavior, including empathy. Joseph Allen of UVA
followed kids for over a decade and found the ones most exposed to peer
pressure around age 13 actually became better kids. They had better
relationships across the board. They were more likely to go to college. The
same sensitivity to the opinions of others that can lead a kid to break the law
is the same thing that makes them empathetic and to get A’s to please their
parents. Paying attention to others and being accommodating is more often good
than bad. And what about the children that were immune to peer pressure? Their
GPA was nearly a full grade lower. And their relationships suffered. They
weren’t iconoclastic ubermenschen rising above the crowd; they were just
disengaged and detached. This is the real result of what happens when you don’t
care what anyone thinks.

Peer pressure isn’t good or bad – your peers are. If you moved your troubled
teen to a new high school filled with well-behaved students, would you be
hoping your child was immune to peer pressure — or very susceptible? We learn
some of our best qualities by being open to the praise or criticism of those
around us. Yes, people often say that they got into drugs because they “hung
out with the wrong people” but how do they get out of it? Often with an
AA-style group that surrounds them with the right people. Face it, you don’t
obey most laws and norms every day because you’re constantly rationally
calculating the trade-offs or because you’re a perfect, wonderful being of pure
light. The majority of what you do is because of habits and peer pressure – not
wanting to be seen as a weirdo by your peers. And before you say I sound
cynical, might I add, that handling things that way usually makes perfect
sense.

Peruse the average YouTube comments section and you may not think humans are
all that smart, but we instinctively know that other people usually try to do
what’s good for them and avoid what’s bad for them. We also know that as an
individual we can’t possibly judge the optimal next move we should make 1000
times a day. So we delegate a lot of the decision-making to the group. It’s the
unconscious equivalent of checking movie reviews. And work economist Abhijit
Banerjee shows when we’re lacking info to make good decisions, imitating those
around us is a very rational strategy.

Of course, companies now leverage our natural tendency to conform to peer
pressure. Ever get that letter from the electric company informing you that
your neighbors are using less electricity than you do? Those letters work.
Households who received them subsequently reduced their energy usage by an
average 6.3%. Nobody wants to feel manipulated but there’s a powerful lesson
here…

What if you did this on your own, for yourself, in service of your goals? What
if we need more peer pressure, not less? Improving yourself is hard. So instead
of asking for a new brain for Christmas, it might be smarter to change your
context than to directly try and change yourself. They say you are “known by
the company you keep” but it’s more like you _become_ the company you keep.
We’re going to be influenced by others, so what if we deliberately choose who
and how? I call it “Strategic Peer Pressure.”

Mom always said don’t hang out with bad kids, and that’s a great first step.
But what if we take it further and spend more time with the people we want to
be like? The people who bring out the best in you?

And this isn’t just speculation. Want to be healthier? “The Longevity Project”,
which studied over 1000 people from youth to death, came to the conclusion
that: “The groups you associate with often determine the type of person you
become. For people who want improved health, association with other healthy
people is usually the strongest and most direct path of change.” And this isn’t
just true for health, it’s true for most any goal. A 1994 Harvard study titled,
“Personal Accounts of Successful Versus Failed Attempts at Life Change”
concluded that “…social support was strongly associated with successful
change.”

We’re never utterly autonomous. We’re social creatures. Why not leverage our
fundamental nature rather than (often futilely) resisting it? Sometimes we’re
weak on our own but groups are strong. We need others to help us do the right
thing, even with individual goals. The logical conclusion is to be a part of a
group where your desired reputation aligns with who you want to be as a person.

Surround yourself with people you admire and striving to be liked becomes a
more elegant striving to be a better you. Frankly, it’s also easier. Since so
much of peer pressure is unconscious, you’re going with the grain. Reading this
book and trying to use what you learn on your own is good. Spending more time
with others who are trying to use it is more effective, and easier.

Internalizing the lesson of strategic peer pressure can also make you a more
compassionate person. “Pull yourself up by the bootstraps” personal improvement
can lead to an attitude that tells others, “I did it on my own so you need to
toughen up and get your act together.” But realizing that personal change comes
from social change, that we are irresistibly influenced by our environment
doesn’t imply superiority. We got where we are through others. And so maybe
they just need help too. _Your_ help.

It’s the flip side to strategic peer pressure. Others influence you but you
also influence others. I call this part “scientific karma.” No magic. No
woo-woo. But understanding the science of behavioral contagion means we know
that it is a circle where others influence us and we influence others. And now
that you know how the context others provide powerfully changes who you are,
you know that you are part of that context for other people. With great power
comes great responsibility, Spider-Man.

If your good friend becomes obese, you have a 171% greater chance of becoming
obese. But that also means if you become obese, your good friend has a 171%
chance of becoming obese. It goes both ways. We’ve increasingly restricted
smoking because secondhand smoke might hurt your health. That’s true but, when
you run the numbers, it’s actually not the strongest case against smoking.
Carcinogenic particles you put into the air aren’t nearly as bad for me as the
fact that _seeing you smoke may influence me to take up smoking_. That’s far
more dangerous to me. And those particles don’t affect my friends and family.
But if you influence me to start smoking, my loved ones have one more smoker in
their network, influencing them to smoke. That’s bad scientific karma. It
spreads.

And when you use strategic peer pressure and increase your time with those you
want to be like, you must still make an effort to make good choices. Because
you’re now part of that network. Your bad behavior can influence others and
reduce the overall good of the group — which will eventually circle back and
reduce its positive effect on you. That same study which showed divorce was
contagious said, “the results suggest that attending to the health of one’s
friends’ marriages serves to support and enhance the durability of one’s own
relationship.” Karma, karma, karma. Don’t just join a good group, be a good
contributor in that group to foster its power, for yourself and others.

As Abraham Kaplan wrote, _“We need each other to become ourselves.”_

And this is just a fraction of the bonus chapter. The full section has insights
on how to get to know yourself better, how to be the best you imaginable, and a
deep look into the crazy neuroscience of your personality — and why it is the
way it is.

**Only one week left to receive the full [bonus chapter](https://bakadesuyo.com/2022/03/plays-well-with-others/).** You can get it if you [preorder now](https://geni.us/pwwo).

Thanks!

Eric

![](moz-extension://dc465a85-394a-ae40-a284-1c368817eca9/wp-content/themes/bakadesuyohttps://raw.githubusercontent.com/arafatm/assets/main/img/closet.svg)

#### Over **500,000** people have subscribed to my newsletter. Join now and get the beginning of my new book free:

I want to subscribe!

