---
categories: psychology
source: https://www.sicotests.com/psyarticle.asp?id=409
author: Dr Simon Moss
title: The Uncertainty Intensification Hypothesis
---

> Many people do not like the feeling of uncertainty.  They like to understand
> the end of a movie.  They like to know from whom they received a letter,
> regardless of whether the contents are loving or critical.

## Overview

### The effects of uncertainty on the duration of emotions

Many people do not like the feeling of uncertainty. They like to understand the
end of a movie. They like to know from whom they received a letter, regardless
of whether the contents are loving or critical.

Nevertheless, in some instances, **uncertainty can prolong feelings, including
positive emotions**. That is, uncertainty has been shown to amplify emotions
and moods (e.g., Wilson, Centerbar, Kermer, & Gilbert, 2005). After a pleasant
experience, most people feel contentment, enthusiasm, and other positive
emotions. If these individuals also feel a sense of uncertainty, these emotions
are especially likely to persist, called the uncertainty intensification
hypothesis.

To illustrate, *the joy that employees feel after they receive praise is more
likely to persist if the source of this feedback is concealed*. Likewise, *the
delight that individuals feel after they receive some gift is more likely to
persist if the source of this donation is unclear*.

### Affective adaptation

Affective adaptation represents an attempt to explain this finding (see Wilson
& Gilbert, 2008). In essence, certainty implies that individuals understand the
experience. They appreciate the causes or consequences of this episode. Their
perception of the world is adapted to integrate this event. For example, if
they receive a kind letter from someone they know, they now perceive this
person as supportive. The event, therefore, is now integrated with their
updated perception of the world. The episode is regarded as typical, curbing
the intensity of emotions.

In contrast, uncertainty implies that individuals do not understand this
experience. They cannot identify, with clarity, the causes or consequences of
this episode. They are not willing yet to adapt their perception of the world
to accommodate this event, partly because they do not know which assumptions or
beliefs to change. For example, if they receive a kind but anonymous letter,
their perception of other people does not change. The event, therefore,
deviates from their expectations or perceptions of the world. Because the event
is not regarded as typical, intense emotions persist. In particular, they
ruminate over this event more extensively, amplifying the emotions.

In short, **compared to uncertainty, certainty increases the likelihood the
event seems typical rather than significant**. In addition, *certainty tends to
evoke thoughts that revolve around abstract facts instead of more tangible
details*.

## Empirical evidence

### Uncertain endings to stories

Wilson, Centerbar, Kermer, and Gilbert (2005) demonstrated this effect of
uncertainty on emotions. Participants were exposed to an inspiring story about
a person. Some participants were also told about the life of this person many
years later, curbing any sense of uncertainty. Other participants did not
receive information about the life of this person many years later. Later, all
participants reported the extent to which they felt various emotions.

If uncertainty had been resolved, the positive emotions did not last as long.
Within about 15 minutes, feelings of happiness had subsided. If uncertainty had
not been resolved, because the ending was not as clear, these feelings
persisted.

### Romantic attraction

*Affective adaptation explains the attraction that people sometimes feel
towards someone when they are not certain these feelings are reciprocated*
(Whitchurch, Wilson, & Gilbert, 2011). That is, because of this uncertainty,
the intensity or duration of this attraction tends to persist.

For example, in one study, college women were exposed to profiles of four male
students on Facebook. They were also told the men had observed their profiles
as well. Furthermore, some of the women were told the men rated them very
favorably. That is, they were informed they were granted access only to the
profiles of men who perceived them as very attractive. On other occasions, they
were told these four man rated them moderately--that is, similar to average.
Finally, to provoke uncertainty, some of the women were told these men could
have rated them very favorably or moderately. Finally, 15 minutes later, the
women evaluated the extent to which they perceived these men as attractive.

In general, if the women had experienced a sense of certainty--that is, if they
knew how the men felt--their ratings tended to match the evaluations of these
males. That is, they liked the males who evaluated them very favorably & they
did not tend to like the males who evaluated them as average.

Interestingly, *if the women had experienced a sense of uncertainty--that is, if
they did not how the men felt---their evaluations were especially positive
relative to both the other conditions*. Interestingly, *because of this
uncertainty, they reflected upon these men more often, increasing attraction*.
That is, in this condition, they were more likely to admit that thoughts about
these men were often evoked during the 15 minutes after they read the profiles.

### Uncertain rewards

As Kurtz, Wilson, and Gilbert (2007) demonstrated, *if individuals are informed
they will receive a reward, they experience more positive feelings during the
period they are not certain of which award they will be bestowed*. When
individuals are informed they will win a prize that is worth $5--perhaps a box
of chocolates or a coffee mug--their emotions diminish once informed which of
these options they will receive. Indeed, they tend to experience more
persistent positive emotions if uncertain which prize they will receive than if
told they will receive both prizes.

### Uncertain phrases

One of the limitations of previous studies is that uncertainty is often
confounded with content. To illustrate, participants might be exposed to a
story in which an ending is either withheld or exhibited. Conceivably, this
ending itself, and not the sense of certainty, could amplify emotions.

Bar-Anan, Wilson, and Gilbert (2009) developed a paradigm that overrides this
problem. All participants watched the same movie. However, during the movie,
some participants repeated phrases that highlight uncertainty, whereas other
participants repeated phrases that highlight certainty. Positive films evoked
positive emotions over an extended duration, and negative films evoked negative
emotions, especially when phrases that relate to uncertainty were repeated.

## Practical implications

One practical implication of these findings is that, in the workplace,
employees should occasionally receive rewards or gifts from their managers
without any explanation. That is, the reasons they received these rewards or
gifts should not be specified explicitly. When employees feel angry or upset,
however, managers need to reach some clear decision. That is, they should at
least specify the next action that needs to be implemented.

Similarly, managers and supervisors often plan to reward employees, either to
recognize exemplary contributions or to improve morale. Whenever possible,
managers and supervisors should ask employees to specify which options from a
list they prefer: perhaps concert tickets, book vouchers, financial assistance
to complete a training program, opportunity to assume an additional role, and
so forth. The employees should then be informed they will receive one of their
two preferred items--but the precise option should not be specified until the
reward is bestowed. This uncertainty has been shown to prolong excitement and
pleasure.

## References

Bar-Anan, Y., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2009). The feeling of
uncertainty intensifies affective reactions. _Emotion_, 9, 123-127.

Kurtz, J. L., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2007). Quantity versus
uncertainty: When winning one gift is better than winning two. _Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology_, 43, 979-985.

Lee, Y., & Qiu, C. (2009). When uncertainty brings pleasure: The role of
prospect imageability and mental imagery. _Journal of Consumer Research_,
36, 624-633.

Whitchurch, E. R., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, T. D. (2011). "He loves me, he
loves me not...": uncertainty can increase romantic attraction.  _Psychological
Science_, 22, 172-175.

Wilson, T. D., Centerbar, D. B., Kermer, D. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2005). The
pleasures of uncertainty: Prolonging positive moods in ways people do not
anticipate. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_, 88, 5-21.

Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2008). Explaining away: A model of affective
adaptation. Perspectives on _Psychological Science_, 3, 370-386.

