---
category: psychology
tags: relationship
Source: https://www.verywellmind.com/small-ways-to-stay-connected-to-your-spouse-4140595
title: Use Simple and Small Gestures for Getting Connected to Your Spouse
---

> If you're feeling disconnected from your spouse, start using simple words and
> gestures that will help you reconnect.

When you've been in a relationship for a long time, it's easy to start to feel
disconnected. The things that once made you feel excited and important [now
seem
routine](https://www.verywellmind.com/common-marriage-problems-and-solutions-3144958).
The words that your partner once whispered quietly in your ear have faded away.
The ordinary moments of each day are no longer as special or fresh as they once
were. No matter how long you and your spouse have been together, it is
important to try to rekindle the romance and nurture your marriage. One way
that you can help your [relationship move from "strained" to
"fantastic"](https://www.verywellmind.com/strengthen-a-marriage-and-avoid-divorce-1270948)
is to start by using simple words and gestures that say help you stay
emotionally connected to your partner.

## 1. Use Nicknames

Do not be afraid to use pet nicknames with your partner. Even if you've never
used a nickname before, sometimes something as simple as calling your loved one
"Baby" or "Sweetie" can make him [feel
special](https://www.verywellmind.com/make-your-wife-feel-special-1270940). If
your wife looks pretty one day, consider calling her "Hottie" or "Sexy."
There’s no need to feel silly when you use pet names with your partner. In
fact, many adults find that nicknames are a very effective way that you can
convey your interest and attraction to your partner.

## 2. Use Verbal Affirmations

Another important way that you can demonstrate your affection is to try to be
verbally affirming. For many individuals, learning how to say something
positive to a partner can be tricky. If you've been fighting recently, your
spouse might feel like your compliment is backhanded or that you're teasing
her. Make sure that you are very specific in your compliment and that your tone
is even, calm, and gentle. For example, you could say, "I love that dress on
you. The color is really flattering with your skin tone." Another option would
be to point out, "I loved listening to you read a story to the kids. You're a
really great dad."

## 3. Do a Chore or Task

If there is a chore that your spouse hates doing, why not surprise him by
taking care of it yourself? Something as simple as taking out the garbage,
taking your dog for a walk, or even cleaning the dinner dishes can convey your
[love to your partner](https://www.verywellmind.com/theories-of-love-2795341).
Keep in mind that when you try to use a kind gesture to show your love, you
need to avoid bringing up the topic later on.

If you're going to be kind, do so without expecting reciprocation or thanks.
While your partner certainly should thank you, never do something kind just to
receive his praise.

## 4. Send a Text Message Just Because

Send a loving text during the day for no reason other than to check in on your
spouse. No need to talk about who’s picking up the kids or what’s for dinner.
Just a simple “hi” and a message that you are thinking about them and just
wanted to check in.

## 5. Give a Random Hug

Give a hug for no reason and when it is unexpected. Hugs are guaranteed to be
heartwarming. Giving a hug at random will send the message that you are caring
and thoughtful. It is also an excellent way to show affection.

## 6. Plan Something New to Do Together

The novelty will help keep the spark alive in your marriage. Doing a new
experience together gets the bonding hormones flowing. But, go further with
this and take the initiative to plan something for you both. Remember back when
you were dating, this was a non-issue. Remember, you still need to date your
spouse!

## 7. Affirm Your Spouse’s Point of View

You should always try to see your spouse's point of view. If you're arguing,
having a difficult time getting along, or just having an ordinary disagreement,
try to put yourself in his shoes. While it's normal to disagree, demonstrating
that you understand what he's trying to say can go a long way in showing
respect and love for your partner.

Ask curious and insightful questions so that you can understand where your
partner is coming from. Then let him or her know you “get it!”
