---
categories: career
tags: [interview]
source: https://www.thecut.com/article/questions-to-ask-in-a-job-interview.html
author: Alison Green, The Cut
title: 10 Impressive Questions to Ask in a Job Interview
---




1. TOC


## How will you measure the success of the person in this position?

This gets right to the crux of what you need to know about the job: **What does
it mean to do well, and what will you need to achieve in order for the manager
to be happy with your performance?**

Initially, you might think that the job description already laid this out, but
it’s not uncommon for a job description to be the same one an employer has been
using for the last ten years, despite the job having changed significantly
during that time. Organizations often post job descriptions that primarily use
boilerplate language from HR, while the actual manager has very different ideas
about what’s most important in the role. Also, frankly, most employers just
suck at writing job descriptions (which is why so many of them sound like they
were written by robots rather than humans), so **it’s useful to have a real
conversation about what the role is really about**. You might find out that
while the job posting listed 12 different responsibilities, your success really
just hinges on 2 of them, or that the posting dramatically understated the
importance of 1 of them, or that the hiring manager is battling with her own
boss about expectations for the role, or even that the manager has no idea what
success would look like in the job (which would be a sign to proceed with
extreme caution).

## What are some of the challenges you expect the person in this position to face?

This can **get at information you’d never get from the job description** — like
that you’ll have to deal with messy interdepartmental politics, or that the
person you’ll be working with most closely is difficult to get along with, or
that you’ll need to work within draconian budget restrictions on your program.

It can **also create an opening for you to talk about how you’ve approached
similar challenges in the past**, which can be reassuring to your interviewer.
I don’t recommend asking questions just so you can follow up with a sales pitch
for yourself — that’s annoying and usually pretty transparent — but if asking
about challenges leads to a real discussion of how you’d approach them, it can
be genuinely useful for you both.

## Can you describe a typical day or week in the job?

If the job description mentioned a combination of admin work and program work,
it’s important to know whether 90 percent of your time will be spent on the
admin work or if the split is more like 50/50. Or you might find out that the
part of the job that you were most excited about actually only comes up every
six months. But even barring major insights like that, the answer to this
question can just **help you better visualize what it will actually be like to
be in the job day after day**.

Tip: **Some interviewers will respond to this question with, "Oh, every day is
different." If that happens, try asking, "Can you tell me what the last month
looked like for the person in the job currently? What took up most of their
time?"**

## How long did the previous person in the role hold the position? What has turnover in the role generally been like?

If no one has stayed in the job very long, that could be a red flag about a
difficult manager, unrealistic expectations, lack of training, or some other
land mine. If just one person left after a few months, that’s not necessarily a
danger sign — after all, sometimes things just don’t work out. But **if you
hear there’s been a pattern of people leaving quickly, it’s worth asking, "Do
you have a sense of what has led to the high turnover?"**

## What are you hoping this person will accomplish in their first six months and in their first year?

This question can give you a **sense of what kind of learning curve you’re
expected to have and the pace** of the team and organization. If you’re
expected to have major achievements under your belt after only a few months,
that tells you that they likely won’t give you a lot of ramp-up time. Which
might be fine if you’re coming in with a lot of experience, but it might be
worrisome otherwise. On the flip side, if you’re someone who likes to jump
right in and start getting things done, you might not be thrilled to hear that
most of your first six months will be spent in training.

This question can also draw out information about key projects that you
wouldn’t otherwise have heard about.

## Thinking back to people you’ve seen do this work previously, what differentiated the ones who were good from the ones who were really great at it?

A job candidate asked me this question years ago, and it might be the strongest
question I’ve ever been asked in an interview. The thing about this question is
that it **goes straight to the heart of what the hiring manager is looking
for**.  Hiring managers aren’t interviewing candidates in the hopes of finding
someone who will do an average job; they’re hoping to find someone who will
excel at the job. And this question says that you care about the same thing.
Sure, it doesn’t guarantee that you’ll do extraordinary work, but it makes you
sound like someone who’s at least aiming for that — someone who’s conscientious
and driven, and those are huge things in a hiring manager’s eyes.

Plus, the answer to this question can give you much more nuanced insight into
what it’ll take to truly excel in the job — and whatever the answer is, you can
think about whether or not it’s something you’re likely able to do.

## How would you describe the culture here? What type of people tend to really thrive here, and what type don’t do as well?

If the culture is very formal with lots of hierarchy and you’re happiest in a
more relaxed environment, this might not be the right match for you.
Similarly, if it’s a really competitive environment and you’re more low-key, or
if they describe themselves as entrepreneurial and you prefer structure, it
might not be an ideal workplace for you. If you don’t have a lot of other
options, you still might decide to take the job anyway — but you’ll usually be
happier if you know what you’re signing up for, and aren’t unpleasantly
surprised after you start.

## What do you like about working here?

You can learn a lot by the way people respond to this question. People who
genuinely enjoy their jobs and the company will usually have several things
they can tell you that they like about working there and will usually sound
sincere. But if you get a blank stare or a long silence before your interviewer
answers, or the answer is something like "the paycheck," consider that a red
flag.

## Ask the question you really care about.

Sometimes people use their turn to ask questions in an interview solely as an
additional chance to try to impress their interviewer — asking questions
designed to reflect well on them (by making them look smart, thoughtful, or so
forth) rather than questions designed to help them figure out if the job is
even right for them in the first place. It’s understandable to want to impress
your interviewer, but interviewing is a two-way street — you need to be
assessing the job and the employer and the manager, and figuring out whether
this is a job you want and would do well in. If you’re just focused on getting
the job and not on whether it’s the right job for you, you’re in danger of
ending up in a job where you’re struggling or miserable.

So **before you interview, spend some time thinking about what you really want
to know**. When you imagine going to work at the job every day, what are the
things that will most impact whether you’re happy with the work, with the
culture, with the manager? Maybe it’s important to you to work in an informal
culture with heavy collaboration. Maybe you care most about working somewhere
with sane hours, where calls and texts on the weekend or in the evenings are
rare. Maybe you’ve heard rumors about the stability of the funding for the
position.  Whatever’s important to you or that you’d want to have answered
before you could know if you’d really want the job, think about asking it now.

Of course, you shouldn’t rely only on your interviewer’s answers about these
things. **You should also do due diligence by talking to people in your
network** who might have the inside scoop on the company’s culture or the
manager you’d be working for, **reading online reviews at places like
Glassdoor**, and talking to other people who work there.

## What’s your timeline for next steps?

This is a basic logistics question, but it’s useful to ask because it gives you
a benchmark for when you can expect to hear something back. Otherwise, if
you’re like many people, in a few days you’re likely to start agonizing about
whether you should have heard back about the job by now and what it means that
you haven’t, and obsessively checking your phone to see if the employer has
tried to make contact. It’s much better for your quality of life if you know
that you’re not likely to hear anything for two weeks or four weeks or that the
hiring manager is leaving the country for a month and nothing will happen until
she’s back, or whatever the case might be.

Plus, asking this question makes it easy for you to check in with the employer
if the timeline they give you comes and goes with no word. **If they tell you
that they plan to make a decision in two weeks and it’s been three weeks, you
can reasonably email them and say something like, "I know you were hoping to
make a decision around this time, so I wanted to check in and see if you have
an updated timeline you can share. I’m really interested in the position and
would love to talk more with you."**
