---
categories: health 
tags: mental health
Source: https://mindspacecounseling.com/15-styles-of-distorted-thinking/)
title: 15 Styles of Distorted Thinking - Mindspace Counseling
---

> Distorted thinking can lead to painful emotions and ongoing relationship
> conflicts. Learn what they are and how to change them.

### 1. **Filtering**

You focus on the negative details and magnify them, while filtering out all
positive aspects of a situation. A single detail may be picked out, and the
whole event becomes colored by this detail. When you pull negative things out
of context, isolated from all the good experiences around you, you make them
larger and more awful than they really are.

For example, your boss gave you some feedback: “You did a great job on the
report. I like how you captured a lot of the details and raised some important
questions. There is just one part that I am kind of confused about. Could you
explain a little bit more on that?” Then you focus on that one detail about
your boss’ confusion, thinking: “_My boss is not happy with my work. I’m gonna
lose my job. This is terrible._“

### 2. **Polarized Thinking**

Things are black or white, good or bad. You tend to perceive everything at the
extremes, with very little room for a middle ground. You have to be perfect, or
you are a failure. We are either best friends forever, or we don’t talk at all
or I don’t want to have anything to do with you. You can be having a good day,
but as soon as something happens, then your whole day is ruined.

### 3. **Overgeneralization**

You come to a general conclusion based on a single incident or piece of
evidence. If something bad happens once, you expect it to happen over and over
again. You tend to use words like “**always**“, “**never**“, “**nobody**“, or
“**everybody**“. If you broke up with a boyfriend, you think nobody will ever
love you again. If you failed a test one time, you expect to never be able to
pass the test. You think all men are selfish and will take advantage of you
because you met one guy who took advantage of you.

### 4. **Mind Reading**

Without their saying so, you know what people are feeling and why they act the
way they do. In particular, you know how people are feeling toward you. Mind
reading depends on a process called projection. You imagine that people feel
the same way you do and react to things the same way you do. Therefore, you
don’t watch or listen carefully enough to notice that they are actually
different. Mind readers jump to conclusions without checking whether they are
true for the other person. It is normal to have assumptions. However, it might
not be helpful to act on those assumptions as if they were facts.

### 5. **Catastrophizing**

You tend to expect disaster or catastrophe. When you are confronted with
different options, you imagine all the worst case scenarios with each option,
and get overwhelmed trying to prepare for all those scenarios. A young woman is
scared of going back to school. She is paralyzed by the thoughts of “_What if I
can’t pass the test? What if I can’t juggle school and work? I will get fired
from my job, then I will lose my house. What if I can’t finish school? Then I
won’t be able to face my parents. They will be so mad at me or maybe even
disown me._” There are endless disasters people can come up with.

### 6. **Personalization**

You tend to think everything around you is somehow related to you or directed
towards you. For example, somebody makes a general comment about honesty, then
you think that person is talking about you, accusing you of being dishonest,
and wanting you to be truthful. So you get mad, feeling you are attacked and
wanting to either fight back or defend yourself. You may get depressed or
ashamed thinking you are a bad person.

### 7. **Control Fallacies**

There are two distortions related to your sense of power and control.

- If you feel **externally controlled**, you see yourself as a helpless victim
  of fate or outside circumstances.
- The fallacy of **internal control** is when you feel responsible for the pain
  and happiness of everyone around you.

Feeling externally controlled keeps you stuck. Because you don’t believe you
can really change your life, let alone make any difference in the world. I’ve
had clients who think “_I’m a hopeless addict. I have the genes. All my family
use. What can I do?_” Then they don’t take action to change and they stay
stuck.

On the other hand, the fallacy of internal control leaves you exhausted.
Because you feel responsible and attempt to meet the needs of everybody around
you, and feel guilty when you cannot. A woman tries to help her parents,
grandparents, boyfriend, boyfriend’s family. She needs to make sure everybody
in her life is good, which gives her a lot to consider and to balance on a
daily basis. She is exhausted most of the time and frequently has panic
attacks.

### 8. **Fallacy of Fairness**

Kids often say this: “_It’s not fair_.” And adults do the same thing. You think
you know what’s fair, but other people won’t agree with you, which makes you
mad. However, fairness is often relative. What’s fair for you may be unfair for
others. It is just so easy and tempting to use it. Because you can avoid being
vulnerable and stand on a seemingly higher moral ground. It is more difficult
but healthier if you just ask for what you need and accept others’ perspectives
when they can’t/won’t give you what you need.

### 9. **Blaming**

Other people are to blame for your problems, or you blame yourself for both
your own and everybody else’ problems. You may think: “_If only my boss is more
understanding_.” “_My wife nags too much._” “_My son needs to listen more, or I
won’t be able to control my temper._” When the blame is placed on others, you
don’t have to change or do the hard work. But you also give up your power and
control. It is actually easier to change yourself than trying to change others.
If you blame yourself for everything, it hurts your self-esteem and self-worth,
makes you feel guilty unnecessarily.

### 10. **Shoulds**

You subscribe to a list of rules about how you and other people should act. The
rules are right and indisputable. You get mad when people break those rules,
and you feel guilty or ashamed if you break them. Notice when you use words
like “**should**” “**must**” and “**ought**.” “_I should be perfect_.” “_I
should be able to handle it._” “_She should give me a call before coming
over._“

The thing is people are different. And a lot of factors can come into play in a
particular situation. It would be nice to have your preferred result/situation.
However, holding yourself and others to inflexible rules will only increase
your stress level.

### 11. **Emotional Reasoning**

You make a judgment based solely on how you feel. For example,

- If you feel like a failure, then you must be a failure.
- Feeling guilty means you have done something wrong.
- If you feel anxious, then it must be dangerous.

The problem is: if your distorted thinking has led to those negative emotions,
then those emotions can’t be wholeheartedly trusted. If you are used to taking
care of everybody else and thinks it is your responsibility, then when you try
to take care of yourself, you will most likely feel guilty, but it doesn’t mean
you are doing something wrong.

### 12. **Fallacy of Change**

This one corresponds with blaming. You expect that other people will change to
suit you if you just pressure or cajole them enough. You need to change people
because your hopes for happiness seem to depend entirely on them.

The truth is the only person you can really control or have much hope of
changing is yourself. The underlying assumption of this thinking style is that
your happiness depends on the actions of others. However, your happiness
actually depends on the thousands of large and small choices you make in your
life.

### 13. **Global Labeling**

You generalize one or two qualities (in yourself or others) into a negative
global judgment. “_I’m a failure_.” “_I’m lazy_.” “_He is a jerk_.” “_She is a
hypocrite._” “_He is an addict_.” These labels come to represent the whole
person and ignore all contrary evidence. It can have a damaging impact on your
self-esteem and can lead to relationship problems and isolation.

### 14. **Being Right**

You feel the need to prove that your opinions and actions are correct, even
when there is no right or wrong in certain situations but just differences in
opinions or perspectives. Being wrong is unthinkable and you will go to any
length to demonstrate your rightness. Being right becomes more important than
an honest and caring relationship. It also means you don’t have to change.

A guy often argues with his wife about parenting, about the family’s diet,
about activities they should do, thinking he has good reasons for his points of
view and he is right. However, it makes it difficult for him to listen to his
wife’s points of view, and then creates an uncomfortable environment with
negative interactions and negative feelings.

### 15. **Heaven’s Reward Fallacy**

You expect to be rewarded in some way because of all your sacrifice and
self-denial. You feel resentful when the reward doesn’t come as expected.
Especially in relationships, you keep giving to others without setting healthy
boundaries, hoping they would appreciate and return the favor at some point.
However, a lot of times, what really happens is people take you for granted and
then you end up feeling used. Or people come to expect that from you and when
you start setting boundaries people get mad at you.

**The important thing to remember** is that nobody is immune to these distorted
thinking styles. Once you become more aware of your thoughts and able to
identify and change any distortions, you will have more power to change how you
feel, your relationships, and your life.